=pod

=head1 Please note

As of version 0.06, this module is closed-source, following a
L<delayed release scheme|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_models_for_open-source_software#Delayed_open-sourcing>.
OAuth authentication via Facebook, Google (OAuth2.0) and Twitter (OAuth1.0a) is
supported since version 0.06. So the bad news is, that the tagline here on github
is a bit over advertising what's puplicly available. The good news is, you can
get a copy of the updated version with all the features. Simply contact me L<here|mailto:o.zucker@web.de>.

=head1 NAME

Dancer::Plugin::Users - Adds user logic, routines and OpenID auth to Dancer apps

=head1 SYNOPSIS

	use Dancer::Plugin::Users;

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module adds one flavour of basic logic and routes it needs to enable users
of your web application to register, log in and out and end their association.

As bonus, it also offers L<OpenID|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenID> logins! Yay!

For all the Why & How, you might also want to check out the L<thread of the original pull-request|https://github.com/PerlDancer/Dancer/pull/829>
this module is based on, in addition to the "background" section further down.

=head1 DATABASE & SESSION

The plugin assumes that L<Dancer::Plugin::Database> is in use and some other
plugin is offering a session() store. Upon app startup, Dancer::Plugin::Users will
connect to database table 'users', which is created if it doesn't exist.

In terms of password storage, we are on the safe side by relying on L<Dancer::Plugin::Passphrase>
which employs best practice by hashing and per-user-salting passwords, among others. 
When we process registrations, this module here also uses a simple regex to blacklist
very common passwords but that is only considered as being a minimal fail-safe default. 
See the "Excourse" section below for some musings on how to improve that.

=head1 ROUTES

The module adds six routes to your application, hardcoded. Although you can change
their URLs from the config files:

	/login
	/openid_login
	/logout
	/register
	/openid_register
	/end_membership

Each route relies on a template of the same name. The examples folder in this package
should have some basic templates for you to start from.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

In config files, you can set these variables:

	plugins:
	  Users:
	    route_login: "/login"
	    route_openid_login: "/openid_login"
	    route_logout: "/logout"
	    route_register: "/register"
	    route_openid_register: "/openid_register"
	    route_end_membership: "/end_membership"
	    after_login: "sub { return '/user/'. $_[0]->{id}; }"
	    reserved_logins: "admin root superuser demo Anonymous test"	  # space separated, case-insensitive
	    reserved_passwords: undef	  # space separated, case-insensitive, appended to internal regex
	    db_table: "users"

The example also shows the defaults, so all this can be left out if these are okay
for you.

The variable "after_login" is special in such regard that if it is set in one of
the config files, the string is eval()'ed upon module-load to replace the default
internal anon-code-ref pictured above. It is expected that it contains a sub that
can process the passed $_[0], which is a hash-ref populated with at least user->{id}
and $user->{nickname}.

=head1 USAGE

In templates, for example:

	<% IF session.user.id %>
		Hello <a href="/user/<% session.user.id %>"><% session.user.nickname %></a> | <a href="/user/<% session.user.id %>">My profile</a> | <a href="/logout">logout</a>
	<% ELSE %>
		<a href="/login" rel="nofollow">login</a> . <a href="/register" rel="nofollow">register</a>
	<% END %>

In your route's code:

	# This is what's done after a sucessful login
	session 'user' => {
		id		=> $user->{id},
		nickname	=> $user->{nickname},
		openid		=> $verified_identity->{identity}, # only on openID logins
	};

	# add this somewhere to check if a visitor is logged-in
	forward '/login' unless session('user');

=head1 BACKGROUND

I took inspiration from the audacity of L<Locale::Wolowitz> to do something in
'yet another way'. The result is a wild blend of what would normally end up in more
focused, separate modules, probably within the ::Auth or some user management namespace - 
only here, it's all packaged in one single (light) module that 'simply works'.

It's meant less to be a well thought out authentication module, or a complete user
management add-on, and is far from being a framework. It's more a set of common
practices, routines and tools I tend to throw-in when I build webapps that know
about the concepts of "users" and "logins". As such, it doesn't come with ready-built
templates, (as you'd have to customise them anyway), it makes a few assumtions
about application flow and is not fully configurable. Sorry for that. It's just
what looks sane to me. Anyway, I share it here as it may be of use for like-minded
developers, and it's handy to have it up on GitHub. Yes, read that again, GitHub 
only for now, as reserving the Dancer::Plugin::Users namespace might be a bit too
audacious.

=head1 EXCOURSE ON PASSWORDS

Weak, common or colloquially 'bad' passwords are a security threat for your web
applications. As such, this module currently requires passwords to be at least 6
characters long and matches against a regex with a very limited set of weak passwords.
This can be considered as being an absolute minimum, but probably better than having
no checks at all. And of course, these checks are only done within the local /register
route, but many OpenId providers probably have a superior scheme implemented.

If you want to override this module's password checks (once the API to do that in
a straightforward way materialises), here are some modules and things for you to
consider:

=over

=item *

You can impose different constraints upon passwords: require a minimum length, complexity
or entropy, or do blacklisting (in whole or in parts) by using language dictionaries
or (better) lists of passwords which are frequently used.

Some approaches are light on resources and/or easily cachable within your application,
while others, usually more complete solutions, come at the cost of a certain IO
and/or CPU overhead.

When using a dictionary, don't forget to add words that users usually I<see> while
they choose a password on your site/ registration page, like your webapp's name.
Just look at lists of leaked passwords from major sites: top used passwords usually
are or contain the site's name or other (trade)marks related to the respective service.

=item *

L<Data::Password::Check::JPassword> provides a measurement of how strong a given
password is - strings containing uppercase, lowercase, numbers, punctuation or other
non-ascii stuff each increase the score.

=item *

L<Data::Password::Entropy> calculates a similar score, but on a more abstract basis,
taking order, distance of chars etc. into account.

=item *

L<Data::Password> combines a number of constraints like length or order, and matches
against spelling dictionaries usually available on *nix systems - albeit in simple
'loop-through-file'-manner which might contribute to the overall IO burden of your
webapp.

=item *

L<Data::Password::BasicCheck> looks for basics like minimum length and other more
elaborate string permutations like roations, reorderings, etc. Well, and one other,
less optimal thing, a 'maximum length', which might make some sense in... well,
err, actually no sane scenario.

=item *

L<Data::Password::Common> Dagolden's shot at it matches passwords against a (one)
dictionary file. It comes bundled with over half a million passwords better to be
rejected and relies on L<Search::Dict> to loop in an optimized way though the dictionary
(which has to be sorted for that to work, btw). Also, you can provide (roll) your
own dictionary. A good (not language vocabulary only!) dictionary in combination
with a minimum length constraint can be quite a complete solution.

=item *

L<Data::Password::Simple> is a simple module that combines a minimum length constraint
and a dictionary matcher that keeps the whole dictionary after module-load in memory
as a hash. This module is probably quite exactly what you would 'reinvent' when you
want to avoid disk access completely. But make sure you have that RAM to spare when
your dict reaches a certain size.

=back

Now it's on you to decide if you want to rely on clever calculations of a password's
strength or on (in a reverse way) "brute-force" dictionary matching.

=head1 BUGS & CAVEATS

As I think the default configuration is the most practical, that's what I
use and that's the proven one. As a result, changing settings is not that well tested.

The database currently holds only one OpenID peer. That might be a limitation if
you want to offer your users multiple OpenID authorities to log into a single account
on your webapp. 

In case you found anything obvious to fix/change/improve, feel free to contribute
on github.

=head1 SEE ALSO

For completeness, last time I looked, these authentication-related Dancer plugins
were on CPAN:
L<Dancer::Plugin::Auth::Extensible>, L<Dancer::Plugin::Auth::RBAC>, L<Dancer::Plugin::Auth::Twitter>,
L<Dancer::Plugin::Auth::Github>, L<Dancer::Plugin::Authen::Simple>, L<Dancer::Plugin::Facebook>,
L<Dancer::Auth::GoogleAuthenticator>

=head1 COPYRIGHT & LICENSE

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself
